---
title: "A Nested Edge Addition Strategy for Network Controllability Robustness Enhancement"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-3-SMC
excerpt: 'This paper proposed a Nested Edge Addition Strategy for Network Controllability Robustness Enhancement.'
date: 2023-6-14
venue: 'Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC)'

---

## Abstract:

Edge rectification is a widely used method to enhance network robustness. However, in some networked systems, edge rectification may be challenging or even infeasible to implement. An edge addition strategy is proposed as an alternative optimization method in this paper. Nested Ring Structure (NRS), whereby each node’s edges connect its nearest neighbors along the backbone direction, have exhibited robust controllability against random attacks. Therefore, The Nested Edge Addition (NEA) strategy is proposed, which enhances network controllability by building NRS through edge addition to a given initial network. With a small number of added edges, NEA can rapidly enhance network controllability, allowing the network to be controlled using just one driver node. The more nested edges are added, the stronger the NRS in a network, thus exhibiting better controllability robustness. The effectiveness of NEA is verified by simulations on both synthetic and realworld networks. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that NEA is an efficient strategy for designing network topology and optimizing real-world networks.

## Citation:

Chengpei Wu, Siyi Xu, and Junli Li “A Nested Edge Addition Strategy for Network Controllability Robustness Enhancement” IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) October 1-4, 2023, Maui, Hawaii, USA.

## Download:

- To be updated.